### LVs predict drug-disease pairs better than single genes

We next determined how substituting LVs for individual genes predicted known treatment-disease relationships.
For this, we used the transcriptional responses to small molecule perturbations profiled in LINCS L1000 [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.10.049], which were further processed and mapped to DrugBank IDs [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkt1068; @doi:10.7554/eLife.26726; @doi:10.5281/zenodo.47223].
Based on an established drug repurposing strategy that matches reversed transcriptome patterns between genes and drug-induced perturbations [@doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.3002648; @doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.3001318], we adopted a previously described framework that uses imputed transcriptomes from TWAS to prioritize drug candidates [@doi:10.1038/nn.4618].
For this, we computed a drug-disease score by calculating the negative dot product between the $z$-scores for a disease (from TWAS) and the $z$-scores for a drug (from LINCS) across sets of genes of different sizes (see [Methods](#sec:methods:drug)).
Therefore, a large score for a drug-disease pair indicated that higher (lower) predicted expression values of disease-associated genes are down (up)-regulated by the drug, thus predicting a potential treatment.
Similarly, for the LV-based approach, we estimated how pharmacological perturbations affected the gene module activity by projecting expression profiles of drugs into our latent representation (Figure {@fig:entire_process}b).
We used a manually-curated gold standard set of drug-disease medical indications [@doi:10.7554/eLife.26726; @doi:10.5281/zenodo.47664] for 322 drugs across 53 diseases to evaluate the prediction performance.


![
**Drug-disease prediction performance for gene-based and LV-based approaches.**
The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) (left) and the precision-recall curves (right) for a gene-based and LV-based approach.
"Random" refers to the average precision of a hundred classifiers with randomly permuted scores, where the error band represents the 95% confidence interval.
AUC: area under the curve; AP: average precision.
](images/drug_disease_prediction/roc_pr_curves.svg "ROC-PR curves for drug-disease prediction"){#fig:drug_disease:roc_pr width="80%"}


It is important to note that the gene-trait associations and drug-induced expression profiles projected into the latent space represent a compressed version of the entire set of results.
Despite this information loss, the LV-based method outperformed the gene-based one with an area under the curve of 0.632 and an average precision of 0.858 (Figure @fig:drug_disease:roc_pr).
The prediction results suggested that this low-dimensional space captures biologically meaningful patterns that can link pathophysiological processes with the mechanism of action of drugs.


We examined a specific drug-disease pair to determine whether the LVs driving the prediction were biologically plausible.
Nicotinic acid (niacin) is a B vitamin widely used clinically to treat lipid disorders, although there is controversy on its clinical utility in preventing cardiovascular disease [@pmid:22085343; @pmid:25014686; @pmid:30977858].
Niacin exerts its effects on multiple tissues, although its mechanisms are not well understood [@doi:10.1016/j.amjcard.2008.02.029; @doi:10.1194/jlr.S092007; @pmid:24363242; @pmid:24713591].
This compound can increase high-density lipoprotein (HDL) by inhibiting an HDL catabolism receptor in the liver.
Niacin also inhibits diacylglycerol acyltransferase–2 (DGAT2), which decreases the production of low-density lipoproteins (LDL) either by modulating triglyceride synthesis in hepatocytes or by inhibiting adipocyte triglyceride lipolysis [@doi:10.1016/j.amjcard.2008.02.029].
Niacin was one of the drugs in the gold standard set indicated for atherosclerosis (AT) and coronary artery disease (CAD).
We observed that this compound was predicted by the gene-based and LV-based approach as a medical indication for coronary artery disease (CAD), with scores above the mean (0.51 and 0.96, respectively).
For AT, the LV-based approach predicted niacin as a therapeutic drug with a score of 0.52, whereas the gene-based method assigned a negative score of -0.01 (below the mean).
Since LVs represent interpretable features associated with specific cell types, we analyzed which LVs positively contributed to these predictions (i.e., with an opposite direction between niacin and the disease).
Notably, LV246 (Figure @fig:lv246), expressed in adipose tissue and liver and associated with plasma lipids and high cholesterol (Table @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv246), was the 16th most important module in the prediction of niacin as a therapeutic drug for AT.
Besides the gold standard set, LV246 was among the top modules for other cardiovascular diseases, such as ischaemic heart disease (wide definition, 15th module) and high cholesterol (7th module).

![
**Top cell types/tissues where LV116's genes are expressed.**
Values in the $y$-axis come from matrix $\mathbf{B}$ in the MultiPLIER models (Figure {@fig:entire_process}b).
In the $x$-axis, cell types/tissues are sorted by the maximum sample value.
The figure shows a clear immune response with cell types under different stimuli.
<!-- https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?study=SRP045500 -->
MS: multiple sclerosis;
<!-- https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?study=SRP045569 -->
<!-- PBMCs: peripheral blood mononuclear cells; -->
HSV: treated with herpes simplex virus;
<!-- https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?study=SRP015670 -->
WNV: infected with West Nile virus;
<!-- https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?study=SRP062958 -->
IFNa: treated with interferon-alpha;
<!-- https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?study=SRP039361 -->
HMDM: human peripheral blood mononuclear cell-derived macrophages;
<!-- IPSDM: human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived macrophages; -->
<!-- https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?study=SRP056733 -->
Salm: infected with *Salmonella typhimurium*;
Yers: infected with *Yersinia pseudotuberculosis*;
<!-- https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/sra/?study=SRP062966 -->
ISM: Interferon Signature Metric;
SLE: Systemic lupus erythematosus.
](images/lvs_analysis/lv116/lv116-cell_types.svg "LV116 cell types"){#fig:lv116:cell_types width="100%"}



The analysis of other top niacin-contributing LVs across different cardiovascular diseases revealed additional mechanisms of action.
For example, *GPR109A/HCAR2* encodes a G protein-coupled high-affinity niacin receptor in adipocytes and immune cells, including monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils and dendritic cells [@doi:10.1016/j.tips.2006.05.008; @doi:10.1038/sj.jid.5700586].
It was initially thought that the antiatherogenic effects of niacin were solely due to the inhibition of lipolysis in adipose tissue.
However, it has been shown that nicotinic acid can reduce atherosclerosis progression independently of its antidyslipidemic activity by activating *GPR109A* in immune cells [@doi:10.1172/JCI41651], thus boosting anti-inflammatory processes [@doi:10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.179283].
In addition, flushing, a common adverse effect of niacin, is also produced by the activation of GPR109A in Langerhans cells (macrophages of the skin).
This alternative mechanism for niacin could have been hypothesized by examining the cell types where the top-contributing modules are expressed:
for instance, LV116 and LV931 (Figures @fig:lv116:cell_types and @fig:sup:lv931, and Tables @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv116 and @tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv931) were the top two modules for AT, with a strong signature in monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils, dendritic cells, among others.
In Figure @fig:lv116:cell_types, it can be seen that LV116's genes are expressed as an immune response when these cell types are under different stimuli, such as diarrhea caused by different pathogens [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0192082], samples from multiple sclerosis or systemic lupus erythematosus [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0109760; @doi:10.1126/science.aac7442], or infected with different viruses (such as herpes simplex [@url:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA258384], West Nile virus [@doi:10.3390/v5071664], *Salmonella typhimurium* [@doi:10.1038/srep16882], among others).
These three LVs (LV246, LV116 and LV931) were among the top 20 modules contributing to the niacin prediction across different cardiovascular traits (Table @tbl:niacin:cardio:top_lvs).


<!-- niacin:cardiovascular:top_lvs:start DISABLE NOW, BUT HAS TO BE ADDED THE "end" version just below to update table -->
| LV    | Cell type             | Disease                                      |
|:------|:----------------------|:---------------------------------------------|
| LV116 | Immune cells, skin    | Atherosclerosis (ICD10 I70)                  |
|       |                       | Chronic ischaemic heart disease (ICD10 I25)  |
|       |                       | Heart attack, angina, stroke or hypertension |
|       |                       | Ischaemic heart disease (wide definition)    |
| LV931 | Immune cells          | Atherosclerosis (ICD10 I70)                  |
|       |                       | Heart attack, angina, stroke or hypertension |
|       |                       | Ischaemic heart disease (wide definition)    |
| LV246 | Adipose tissue, liver | Atherosclerosis (ICD10 I70)                  |
|       |                       | High cholesterol (self-reported)             |
|       |                       | Ischaemic heart disease (wide definition)    |

Table: **LVs among the top 20 contributors to the prediction of niacin for five cardiovascular diseases.** "Heart attack, angina, stroke or hypertension" refers to the UK Biobank data-field 6150. GWAS sample size: Atherosclerosis (361,194 in total and 566 cases), Chronic ischaemic heart disease (361,194 in total and 12,769 cases), Heart attack, angina, stroke or hypertension (360,420 in total and 253,565 cases), Ischaemic heart disease/wide definition (361,194 in total and 20,857 cases), High cholesterol/self-reported (361,141 in total and 43,957 cases).  {#tbl:niacin:cardio:top_lvs}


Beyond cardiovascular traits, there are other potentially interesting LVs that could extend our understanding of the mechanisms of niacin.
For example, LV66, one of the top LVs affected by niacin (Figure @fig:sup:lv66), was mainly expressed in ovarian granulosa cells.
This compound has been very recently considered a potential therapeutic for ovarian diseases [@doi:10.1159/000495051; @doi:10.1071/RD20306], as it was found to promote follicle growth and inhibit granulosa cell apoptosis in animal models.
