## Discussion

We have introduced a novel computational strategy that integrates statistical associations from TWAS with groups of genes (gene modules) that have similar expression patterns across the same cell types.
Our key innovation is that we project gene-trait associations through a latent representation derived not strictly from measures of normal tissue but also from cell types under a variety of stimuli and at various developmental stages.
This improves interpretation by going beyond statistical associations to infer cell type-specific features of complex phenotypes.
Our approach can identify disease-relevant cell types from summary statistics, and several disease-associated gene modules were replicated in eMERGE.
Using a CRISPR screen to analyze lipid regulation, we found that our gene module-based approach can prioritize causal genes even when single gene associations are not detected.
We interpret these findings with an omnigenic perspective of "core" and "peripheral" genes, suggesting that the approach can identify genes that directly affect the trait with no mediated regulation of other genes and thus prioritize alternative and potentially more attractive therapeutic targets.


Using our gene module perspective, we also integrated drug-induced transcriptional profiles, which allowed us to connect diseases, drugs, and cell types.
We showed that the LV-based drug-repurposing approach outperformed the gene-based one when predicting drug-disease links for 322 drugs across 53 diseases.
Furthermore, and beyond statistical prediction, we focused on cardiovascular traits and a particular drug, niacin, to show that the approach connects pathophysiological processes with known mechanisms of action, including those in adipose tissue, immune cells, and ovarian granulosa cells.
Our LV-based approach could be helpful in generating novel hypotheses to evaluate potential mechanisms of action, or even adverse effects, of known or experimental drugs.


We found that the analysis of associations through latent representations provided reasonable groupings of diseases and traits affected by shared and distinct transcriptional mechanisms expressed in highly relevant tissues.
Our cluster analysis approach also detected the LVs that were most discriminative for each cluster.
Several of these LVs were also significantly associated with different traits.
Some LVs were strongly aligned with known pathways, but others (like LV57) were not, which might represent novel disease-relevant mechanisms.
In some cases, the features/LVs linked to phenotypes appear to be associated with specific cell types.
Associations with such cell type marker genes may reveal potentially causal cell types for a phenotype with more precision.
We observed modules expressed primarily in one tissue (such as adipose in LV246 or ovary in LV66).
Others appeared to be expressed in many contexts, which may capture pathways associated with related complex diseases.
For example, LV136 is associated with cardiovascular disease and measures of corneal biomechanics and is expressed in fibroblasts, osteoblasts, pancreas, liver, and cardiomyocytes, among others.
Other examples include LV844, expressed in whole blood samples and associated with a range of autoimmune diseases;
or LV57, which is clearly expressed in T cells and strongly associated with autoimmune and venous thromboembolism.
From an omnigenic point of view, these patterns might represent cases of "network pleiotropy," where the same cell types mediate molecularly related traits.
To our knowledge, projection through a representation learned on complementary but distinct datasets is a novel approach to identifying cell type and pathway effects on complex phenotypes that is computationally simple to implement.


We also demonstrated that clustering trees, introduced initially as a means to examine developmental processes in single-cell data, provide a multi-resolution grouping of phenotypes based on latent variable associations.
We employed hard-partitioning algorithms (one trait belongs exclusively to one cluster) where the distance between two traits takes into account all gene modules.
However, it is also plausible for two complex diseases to share only a few biological processes instead of being similar across most of them.
Another important consideration is that our TWAS results were derived from a large set of GWAS of different sample sizes and qualities.
Although the potential issues derived from this data heterogeneity were addressed before performing our cluster analyses on traits, data preprocessing steps are always challenging and might not avoid bias altogether.
Considering groups of related diseases was previously shown to be more powerful in detecting shared genetic etiology [@doi:10.1038/ng.3985; @doi:10.1038/s41588-018-0121-0], and clustering trees provide a way to explore such relationships in the context of latent variables.


Finally, we developed an LV-based regression framework to detect whether gene modules are associated with a trait using TWAS $p$-values.
We used PhenomeXcan as a discovery cohort across four thousand traits, and many LV-trait associations replicated in eMERGE.
In PhenomeXcan, we found 3,450 significant LV-trait associations (FDR < 0.05) with 686 LVs (out of 987) associated with at least one trait and 1,176 traits associated with at least one LV.
In eMERGE, we found 196 significant LV-trait associations, with 116 LVs associated with at least one trait/phecode and 81 traits with at least one LV.
We only focused on a few disease types from our trait clusters, but the complete set of associations on other disease domains is available in our [Github repository](https://github.com/greenelab/phenoplier) for future research.
As noted in [Methods](#sec:methods:reg), one limitation of the regression approach is that the gene-gene correlations are only approximately accurate, which could lead to false positives if the correlation among the top genes in a module is not precisely captured.
The regression model, however, is approximately well-calibrated, and we did not observe inflation when running the method in real data.


Our approach rests on the assumption that gene modules with coordinated expression patterns will also manifest coordinated pathological effects.
Our implementation in this work integrates two complementary approaches.
The first is MultiPLIER, which extracts latent variables from large expression datasets, and these LVs could represent either real transcriptional processes or technical factors ("batch effects").
We used a previously published model derived from recount2, which was designed to analyze rare disorders but might not be the optimal latent representation for the wide range of complex diseases considered here.
Also, the underlying factorization method rests on linear combinations of variables, which could miss important and more complex co-expression patterns.
In addition, recount2, the training dataset used, has since been surpassed in size and scale by other resources [@doi:10.1038/s41467-018-03751-6; @doi:10.1101/2021.05.21.445138].
However, it is important to note that our models impose very few assumptions on the latent expression representation.
Therefore, we should be able to easily replace MultiPLIER with other similar approaches like GenomicSuperSignature [@doi:10.1038/s41467-022-31411-3].
The second approach we used in this study is TWAS, where we are only considering the hypothesis that GWAS loci affect traits via changes in gene expression.
Other effects, such as coding variants disrupting protein-protein interactions, are not captured.
Additionally, TWAS has several limitations that can lead to false positives [@doi:10.1038/s41588-019-0385-z; @doi:10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.11.012].
Like GWAS, which generally detects groups of associated variants in linkage disequilibrium (LD), TWAS usually identifies several genes within the same locus [@doi:10.1038/s41588-018-0092-1; @doi:10.1038/ng.3367].
This is due to sharing of GWAS variants in gene expression models, correlated expression of nearby genes, or even correlation of their predicted expression due to eQTLs in LD, among others [@doi:10.1038/s41588-019-0385-z].
Our LV-based regression framework, however, accounts for these gene-gene correlations in TWAS reasonably well.


Our findings are concordant with previous studies showing that drugs with genetic support are more likely to succeed through the drug development pipeline [@doi:10.1038/ng.3314; @doi:10.1038/nn.4618].
In this case, projecting association results through latent variables better prioritized disease-treatment pairs than considering single-gene effects alone.
An additional benefit is that the latent variables driving predictions represent interpretable genetic features that can be examined to infer potential mechanisms of action.
Here we prioritized drugs for diseases with very different tissue etiologies, and a challenge of the approach is to select the most appropriate tissue model from TWAS to find reversed transcriptome patterns between genes and drug-induced perturbations.


Ultimately, the quality of the representations is essential to performance.
Here we used a representation derived from a factorization of bulk RNA-seq data.
Detailed perturbation datasets and single-cell profiling of tissues, with and without perturbagens, and at various stages of development provide an avenue to generate higher quality and more interpretable representations.
On the other hand, the key to interpretability is driven by the annotation of sample metadata.
New approaches to infer and annotate with structured metadata are promising and can be directly applied to existing data [@doi:10.1101/2021.05.10.443525].
Rapid improvements in both areas set the stage for latent variable projections to be widely applied to disentangle the genetic basis of complex human phenotypes.
By providing a new perspective for a mechanistic understanding of statistical associations from TWAS, our method can generate testable hypotheses for the post-GWAS functional characterization of complex diseases, which will likely be an area of great importance in the coming years.
