### A robust and efficient not-only-linear dependence coefficient

![
**Different types of relationships in data.**
Each panel contains a set of simulated data points described by two generic variables: $x$ and $y$.
The first row shows Anscombe's quartet with four different datasets (from Anscombe I to IV) and 11 data points each.
The second row contains a set of general patterns with 100 data points each.
Each panel shows the correlation value using Pearson ($p$), Spearman ($s$) and CCC ($c$).
Vertical and horizontal red lines show how CCC clustered data points using $x$ and $y$.
](images/intro/relationships.svg "Different types of relationships in data"){#fig:datasets_rel width="100%"}

The CCC provides a similarity measure between any pair of variables, either with numerical or categorical values.
The method assumes that if there is a relationship between two variables/features describing $n$ data points/objects, then the **cluster**ings of those objects using each variable should **match**.
In the case of numerical values, CCC uses quantiles to efficiently separate data points into different clusters (e.g., the median separates numerical data into two clusters).
Once all clusterings are generated according to each variable, we define the CCC as the maximum adjusted Rand index (ARI) [@doi:10.1007/BF01908075] between them, ranging between 0 and 1.
Details of the CCC algorithm can be found in [Methods](#sec:ccc_algo).


We examined how the Pearson ($p$), Spearman ($s$) and CCC ($c$) correlation coefficients behaved on different simulated data patterns.
In the first row of Figure @fig:datasets_rel, we examine the classic Anscombe's quartet [@doi:10.1080/00031305.1973.10478966], which comprises four synthetic datasets with different patterns but the same data statistics (mean, standard deviation and Pearson's correlation).
This kind of simulated data, recently revisited with the "Datasaurus" [@url:http://www.thefunctionalart.com/2016/08/download-datasaurus-never-trust-summary.html; @doi:10.1145/3025453.3025912; @doi:10.1111/dsji.12233], is used as a reminder of the importance of going beyond simple statistics, where either undesirable patterns (such as outliers) or desirable ones (such as biologically meaningful nonlinear relationships) can be masked by summary statistics alone.


Anscombe I contains a noisy but clear linear pattern, similar to Anscombe III where the linearity is perfect besides one outlier.
In these two examples, CCC separates data points using two clusters (one red line for each variable $x$ and $y$), yielding 1.0 and thus indicating a strong relationship.
Anscombe II seems to follow a partially quadratic relationship interpreted as linear by Pearson and Spearman.
In contrast, for this potentially undersampled quadratic pattern, CCC yields a lower yet non-zero value of 0.34, reflecting a more complex relationship than a linear pattern.
Anscombe IV shows a vertical line of data points where $x$ values are almost constant except for one outlier.
This outlier does not influence CCC as it does for Pearson or Spearman.
Thus $c=0.00$ (the minimum value) correctly indicates no association for this variable pair because, besides the outlier, for a single value of $x$ there are ten different values for $y$.
This pair of variables does not fit the CCC assumption: the two clusters formed with $x$ (approximately separated by $x=13$) do not match the three clusters formed with $y$.
The Pearson's correlation coefficient is the same across all these Anscombe's examples ($p=0.82$), whereas Spearman is 0.50 or greater.
These simulated datasets show that both Pearson and Spearman are powerful in detecting linear patterns.
However, any deviation in this assumption (like nonlinear relationships or outliers) affects their robustness.


We simulated additional types of relationships (Figure @fig:datasets_rel, second row), including some previously described from gene expression data [@doi:10.1126/science.1205438; @doi:10.3389/fgene.2019.01410; @doi:10.1091/mbc.9.12.3273].
For the random/independent pair of variables, all coefficients correctly agree with a value close to zero.
The non-coexistence pattern, captured by all coefficients, represents a case where one gene ($x$) might be expressed while the other one ($y$) is inhibited, highlighting a potentially strong biological relationship (such as a microRNA negatively regulating another gene).
For the other two examples (quadratic and two-lines), Pearson and Spearman do not capture the nonlinear pattern between variables $x$ and $y$.
These patterns also show how CCC uses different degrees of complexity to capture the relationships.
For the quadratic pattern, for example, CCC separates $x$ into more clusters (four in this case) to reach the maximum ARI.
The two-lines example shows two embedded linear relationships with different slopes, which neither Pearson nor Spearman detect ($p=-0.12$ and $s=0.05$, respectively).
Here, CCC increases the complexity of the model by using eight clusters for $x$ and six for $y$, resulting in $c=0.31$.
