### The CCC reveals linear and nonlinear patterns in human transcriptomic data

We next examined the characteristics of these correlation coefficients in gene expression data from GTEx v8 across different tissues.
We selected the top 5,000 genes with the largest variance for our initial analyses on whole blood and then computed the correlation matrix between genes using Pearson, Spearman and CCC (see [Methods](#sec:data_gtex)).


We examined the distribution of each coefficient's absolute values in GTEx (Figure @fig:dist_coefs).
CCC (mean=0.14, median=0.08, sd=0.15) has a much more skewed distribution than Pearson (mean=0.31, median=0.24, sd=0.24) and Spearman (mean=0.39, median=0.37, sd=0.26).
The coefficients reach a cumulative set containing 70% of gene pairs at different values (Figure @fig:dist_coefs b), $c=0.18$, $p=0.44$ and $s=0.56$, suggesting that for this type of data, the coefficients are not directly comparable by magnitude, so we used ranks for further comparisons.
In GTEx v8, CCC values were closer to Spearman and vice versa than either was to Pearson (Figure @fig:dist_coefs c).
We also compared the Maximal Information Coefficient (MIC) in this data (see [Supplementary Note 1](#sec:mic)).
We found that CCC behaved very similarly to MIC, although CCC was up to two orders of magnitude faster to run (see [Supplementary Note 2](#sec:time_test)).
MIC, an advanced correlation coefficient able to capture general patterns beyond linear relationships, represented a significant step forward in correlation analysis research and has been successfully used in various application domains [@pmid:33972855; @pmid:33001806; @pmid:27006077].
These results suggest that our findings for CCC generalize to MIC, therefore, in the subsequent analyses we focus on CCC and linear-only coefficients.


![
**Distribution of coefficient values on gene expression (GTEx v8, whole blood).**
**a)** Histogram of coefficient values.
**b)** Corresponding cumulative histogram. The dotted line maps the coefficient value that accumulates 70% of gene pairs.
**c)** 2D histogram plot with hexagonal bins between all coefficients, where a logarithmic scale was used to color each hexagon.
](images/coefs_comp/gtex_whole_blood/dist-main.svg "Distribution of coefficient values"){#fig:dist_coefs width="100%"}


A closer inspection of gene pairs that were either prioritized or disregarded by these coefficients revealed that they captured different patterns.
We analyzed the agreements and disagreements by obtaining, for each coefficient, the top 30% of gene pairs with the largest correlation values ("high" set) and the bottom 30% ("low" set), resulting in six potentially overlapping categories.
For most cases (76.4%), an UpSet analysis [@doi:10.1109/TVCG.2014.2346248] (Figure @fig:upsetplot_coefs a) showed that the three coefficients agreed on whether there is a strong correlation (42.1%) or there is no relationship (34.3%).
Since Pearson and Spearman are linear-only, and CCC can also capture these patterns, we expect that these concordant gene pairs represent clear linear patterns.
CCC and Spearman agree more on either highly or poorly correlated pairs (4.0% in "high", and 7.0% in "low") than any of these with Pearson (all between 0.3%-3.5% for "high", and 2.8%-5.5% for "low").
In summary, CCC agrees with either Pearson or Spearman in 90.5% of gene pairs by assigning a high or a low correlation value.

![
**Intersection of gene pairs with high and low correlation coefficient values (GTEx v8, whole blood).**
**a)** UpSet plot with six categories (rows) grouping the 30% of the highest (green triangle) and lowest (red triangle) values for each coefficient.
Columns show different intersections of categories grouped by agreements and disagreements.
**b)** Hexagonal binning plots with examples of gene pairs where CCC ($c$) disagrees with Pearson ($p$) and Spearman ($s$).
For each method, colors in the triangles indicate if the gene pair is among the top (green) or bottom (red) 30% of coefficient values.
No triangle means that the correlation value for the gene pair is between the 30th and 70th percentiles (neither low nor high).
A logarithmic scale was used to color each hexagon.
](images/coefs_comp/gtex_whole_blood/upsetplot-main.svg "Intersection of gene pairs"){#fig:upsetplot_coefs width="100%"}


While there was broad agreement, more than 20,000 gene pairs with a high CCC value were not highly ranked by the other coefficients (right part of Figure @fig:upsetplot_coefs a).
There were also gene pairs with a high Pearson value and either low CCC (1,075), low Spearman (87) or both low CCC and low Spearman values (531).
However, our examination suggests that many of these cases appear to be driven by potential outliers (Figure @fig:upsetplot_coefs b, and analyzed later).
We analyzed gene pairs among the top five of each intersection in the "Disagreements" group (Figure @fig:upsetplot_coefs a, right) where CCC disagrees with Pearson, Spearman or both.

![
**The expression levels of *KDM6A* and *UTY* display sex-specific associations across GTEx tissues.**
CCC captures this nonlinear relationship in all GTEx tissues (nine examples are shown in the first three rows), except in female-specific organs (last row).
](images/coefs_comp/kdm6a_vs_uty/gtex-KDM6A_vs_UTY-main.svg "KDM6A and UTY across different GTEx tissues"){#fig:gtex_tissues:kdm6a_uty width="95%"}

The first three gene pairs at the top (*IFNG* - *SDS*, *JUN* - *APOC1*, and *ZDHHC12* - *CCL18*), with high CCC and low Pearson values, appear to follow a non-coexistence relationship: in samples where one of the genes is highly (slightly) expressed, the other is slightly (highly) activated, suggesting a potentially inhibiting effect.
The following three gene pairs (*UTY* - *KDM6A*, *RASSF2* - *CYTIP*, and *AC068580.6* - *KLHL21*) follow patterns combining either two linear or one linear and one independent relationships.
In particular, genes *UTY* and *KDM6A* (paralogs) show a nonlinear relationship where a subset of samples follows a robust linear pattern and another subset has a constant (independent) expression of one gene.
This relationship is explained by the fact that *UTY* is in chromosome Y (Yq11) whereas *KDM6A* is in chromosome X (Xp11), and samples with a linear pattern are males, whereas those with no expression for *UTY* are females.
This combination of linear and independent patterns is captured by CCC ($c=0.29$, above the 80th percentile) but not by Pearson ($p=0.24$, below the 55th percentile) or Spearman ($s=0.10$, below the 15th percentile).
Furthermore, the same gene pair pattern is highly ranked by CCC in all other tissues in GTEx, except for female-specific organs (Figure @fig:gtex_tissues:kdm6a_uty).
