### LVs link genes that alter lipid accumulation with relevant traits and tissues

Our first experiment attempted to answer whether genes in a disease-relevant LV could represent potential therapeutic targets.
For this, the first step was to obtain a set of genes strongly associated with a phenotype of interest.
Therefore, we performed a fluorescence-based CRISPR-Cas9 in the HepG2 cell line and identified 462 genes associated with lipid regulation ([Methods](#sec:methods:crispr)).
From these, we selected two high-confidence gene sets that either caused a decrease or increase of lipids:
a lipids-decreasing gene-set with eight genes: *BLCAP*, *FBXW7*, *INSIG2*, *PCYT2*, *PTEN*, *SOX9*, *TCF7L2*, *UBE2J2*;
and a lipids-increasing gene-set with six genes: *ACACA*, *DGAT2*, *HILPDA*, *MBTPS1*, *SCAP*, *SRPR* (Supplementary Data 2).


![
**Tissues and traits associated with a gene module related to lipid metabolism (LV246).**
<!--  -->
**a)** Top cell types/tissues in which LV246's genes are expressed.
Values in the $y$-axis come from matrix $\mathbf{B}$ in the MultiPLIER models (Figure {@fig:entire_process}b, see Methods).
In the $x$-axis, cell types/tissues are sorted by the maximum sample value.
<!--  -->
**b)** Gene-trait associations (unadjusted $p$-values from S-MultiXcan [@doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1007889]; threshold at -log($p$)=10) and colocalization probability (fastENLOC) for the top traits in LV246.
The top 40 genes in LV246 are shown, sorted by their LV weight (matrix $\mathbf{Z}$), from largest (the top gene *SCD*) to smallest (*FAR2*);
*DGAT2* and *ACACA*, in boldface, are two of the six high-confidence genes in the lipids-increasing gene set from the CRISPR screen.
Cardiovascular-related traits are in boldface.
<!--  -->
SGBS: Simpson Golabi Behmel Syndrome;
CH2DB: CH<sub>2</sub> groups to double bonds ratio;
HDL: high-density lipoprotein;
RCP: locus regional colocalization probability.
<!--  -->
](images/lvs_analysis/lv246/lv246.svg "LV246 TWAS plot"){#fig:lv246 width="100%"}


Next, we analyzed all 987 LVs using Fast Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (FGSEA) [@doi:10.1101/060012], and found 15 LVs nominally enriched (unadjusted *P* < 0.01) with these lipid-altering gene-sets (Tables @tbl:sup:lipids_crispr:modules_enriched_increase and @tbl:sup:lipids_crispr:modules_enriched_decrease).
Among those with reliable sample metadata, LV246, the top LV associated with the lipids-increasing gene-set, contained genes mainly co-expressed in adipose tissue (Figure {@fig:lv246}a), which plays a key role in coordinating and regulating lipid metabolism.
Using our regression framework across all traits in PhenomeXcan, we found that gene weights for this LV were predictive of gene associations for plasma lipids, high cholesterol, and Alzheimer's disease (Table @tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv246, FDR < 1e-23).
These lipids-related associations also replicated across the 309 traits in eMERGE (Table @tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv246), where LV246 was significantly associated with hypercholesterolemia (phecode: 272.11, FDR < 4e-9), hyperlipidemia (phecode: 272.1, FDR < 4e-7) and disorders of lipoid metabolism (phecode: 272, FDR < 4e-7).


Two high-confidence genes from our CRISPR screening, *DGAT2* and *ACACA*, are responsible for encoding enzymes for triglycerides and fatty acid synthesis and were among the highest-weighted genes of LV246 (Figure {@fig:lv246}b, in boldface).
However, in contrast to other members of LV246, *DGAT2* and *ACACA* were not associated nor colocalized with any of the cardiovascular-related traits and thus would not have been prioritized by TWAS alone;
instead, other members of LV246, such as *SCD*, *LPL*, *FADS2*, *HMGCR*, and *LDLR*, were significantly associated and colocalized with lipid-related traits.
This lack of association of two high-confidence genes from our CRISPR screen might be explained from an omnigenic point of view [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.04.014].
Assuming that the TWAS models for *DGAT2* and *ACACA* capture all common *cis*-eQTLs (the only genetic component of gene expression that TWAS can capture) and there are no rare *cis*-eQTLs, these two genes might represent "core" genes (i.e., they directly affect the trait with no mediated regulation of other genes), and many of the rest in the LV are "peripheral" genes that *trans*-regulate them.

