## Acknowledgements

This study was funded by:
the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation (GBMF 4552 to C.S. Greene; GBMF 4560 to B.D. Sullivan),
the National Human Genome Research Institute (R01 HG010067 to C.S. Greene, S.F.A. Grant and B.D. Sullivan; K99 HG011898 and R00 HG011898 to M. Pividori; U01 HG011181 to W. Wei),
the National Cancer Institute (R01 CA237170 to C.S. Greene),
the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (R01 HD109765 to C.S. Greene),
the National Institute of Aging (R01AG069900 to W. Wei),
the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (R01 GM139891 to W. Wei);
the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (R01 HL163854 to Q. Feng);
the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (DK126194 to B.F. Voight);
the Daniel B. Burke Endowed Chair for Diabetes Research to S.F.A. Grant;
the Robert L. McNeil Jr. Endowed Fellowship in Translational Medicine and Therapeutics to C. Skarke.

The Phase III of the eMERGE Network was initiated and funded by the NHGRI through the following grants:
U01 HG8657 (Group Health Cooperative/University of Washington);
U01 HG8685 (Brigham and Womens Hospital);
U01 HG8672 (Vanderbilt University Medical Center);
U01 HG8666 (Cincinnati Childrens Hospital Medical Center);
U01 HG6379 (Mayo Clinic);
U01 HG8679 (Geisinger Clinic);
U01 HG8680 (Columbia University Health Sciences);
U01 HG8684 (Childrens Hospital of Philadelphia);
U01 HG8673 (Northwestern University);
U01 HG8701 (Vanderbilt University Medical Center serving as the Coordinating Center);
U01 HG8676 (Partners Healthcare/Broad Institute);
and U01 HG8664 (Baylor College of Medicine).

The Penn Medicine BioBank (PMBB) is funded by the Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, a gift from the Smilow family, and the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the National Institutes of Health under CTSA Award Number UL1TR001878.
We thank D. Birtwell, H. Williams, P. Baumann and M. Risman for informatics support regarding the PMBB.
We thank the staff of the Regeneron Genetics Center for whole-exome sequencing of DNA from PMBB participants.

Figure {@fig:entire_process}a was created with BioRender.com.


## Author contributions statement

M. Pividori and C.S. Greene conceived and designed the study.
M. Pividori designed the computational methods, performed the experiments, analyzed the data, interpreted the results, and drafted the manuscript.
C.S. Greene supervised the entire project and provided critical guidance throughout the study.
S. Lu, C. Su, and M.E. Johnson performed the CRISPR screen with the supervision of S.F.A. Grant.
B. Li provided the TWAS results for eMERGE for replication, and this analysis was supervised by M.D. Ritchie.
W. Wei, Q. Feng, B. Namjou, K. Kiryluk, I. Kullo, Y. Luo, and M.D. Ritchie, as part of the eMERGE consortium, provided critical feedback regarding the analyses of this data.
All authors revised the manuscript and provided critical feedback.

## Competing interests statement

The authors declare no competing interests.
