\clearpage

## Supplementary information {.page_break_before}

### Supplementary Note 1: mean type I error rates and calibration of LV-based regression model {#sm:reg:null_sim}

We assessed our GLS model type I error rates (proportion of $p$-values below 0.05) and calibration using a null model of random traits and genotype data from 1000 Genomes Phase III.
We selected 312 individuals with European ancestry, and then analyzed 1,000 traits drawn from a standard normal distribution $\mathcal{N}(0,1)$.
We ran all the standard procedures for the TWAS approaches (S-PrediXcan and S-MultiXcan), including:
1) a standard GWAS using linear regression under an additive genetic model,
2) different GWAS processing steps, including harmonization and imputation procedures as defined in [@doi:10.1002/gepi.22346],
3) S-PrediXcan and S-MultiXcan analyses.
Below we provide details for each of these steps.

**Step 1 - GWAS**. We performed standard QC procedures such as
filtering out variants with missing call rates eexceeding 0.01, MAF below 1% or MAC below 20, and HWE below 1e-6,
and removing samples with high sex-discrepancy and high-relatedness (first and second degree).
We included sex and the top 20 principal components as covariates, performing the association test on 5,923,554 variants across all 1,000 random phenotypes.

**Step 2 - GWAS processing**. These steps include harmonization of GWAS and imputation of $z$-scores, which are part of the TWAS pipeline and are needed in order to ensure an acceptable overlap with SNPs in prediction models.
The scripts to run these steps are available in [@url:https://github.com/hakyimlab/summary-gwas-imputation].
These procedures were run for all 1,000 random phenotypes and generated a total number of 8,325,729 variants, including those with original and imputed $z$-scores.

**Step 3 - TWAS**. We processed the imputed GWAS with S-PrediXcan using the MASHR prediction models on 49 tissues from GTEx v8.
Then, S-MultiXcan was ran using the GWAS and S-PrediXcan outputs to generate gene-trait association $p$-values.

Finally, we ran our GLS model (Equation (@eq:reg:model)) to compute an association between each of the 987 LVs in MultiPLIER and the 1,000 S-MultiXcan results on random phenotypes.
For this, we built a gene correlation matrix specifically for this cohort (see [Methods](#sec:methods:reg)).
Then, we compared the GLS results with an equivalent, baseline ordinarly least squares (OLS) model assuming independence between genes.
Figure @fig:reg:nulls:qqplots compares the distribution of $p$-values of the OLS and GLS models.
The GLS model has a slightly smaller mean type I error rate (0.0558, SD=0.0127) than the baseline OLS model (0.0584, SD=0.0140), and $p$-values follow more closely the expected uniform distribution.
Importantly, the GLS model is able to correct for LVs with adjacent and highly correlated genes at the top such as LV234 (Figure @fig:reg:nulls:qqplot:lv234), LV847 (Figure @fig:reg:nulls:qqplot:lv847), LV45 (Figure @fig:reg:nulls:qqplot:lv45), or LV800 (Figure @fig:reg:nulls:qqplot:lv800), among others.
In contrast and as expected, the OLS model has higher mean type I errors and smaller-than-expected $p$-values in all these cases.

We also detected other LVs with higher-than-expected mean type I errors for both the GLS and OLS models, although they don't have a relatively large number of adjacent genes at the top.
One example is LV914, shown in Figure @fig:reg:nulls:qqplot:lv914.
Inflation in these LVs might be explained by inaccuracies in correlation estimates between the individual-level MultiXcan model and its summary-based version (see Methods).
Therefore, we flagged those with a type I error rate larger than 0.07 (127 LVs) and excluded them from our main analyses.
We didn't see signs of inflation when applying the method in real data (Figure @fig:reg:real:qqplots).

![
**QQ-plots for OLS (baseline) and GLS (PhenoPLIER) models on random phenotypes.**
](images/gls/null_sims/models_qqplots.png "QQ-plots for OLS and GLS models"){#fig:reg:nulls:qqplots tag="S1" width="80%"}

![
**QQ-plots for LV234 on random phenotypes.**
Among the top 1% of genes in this LV, 17 are located in band 6p22.2, 5 in 6p22.1 and 3 in 7q11.23.
](images/gls/null_sims/models_lv234.png "QQ-plots for LV234"){#fig:reg:nulls:qqplot:lv234 tag="S2" width="80%"}

![
**QQ-plots for LV847 on random phenotypes.**
Among the top 1% of genes in this LV, 15 are located in band 6p22.2, 5 in 6p22.1 and 2 in 15q26.1.
](images/gls/null_sims/models_lv847.png "QQ-plots for LV847"){#fig:reg:nulls:qqplot:lv847 tag="S3" width="80%"}

![
**QQ-plots for LV45 on random phenotypes.**
Among the top 1% of genes in this LV, 12 are located in band 6p22.2, 6 in 6p22.1 and 3 in 1q23.3.
](images/gls/null_sims/models_lv45.png "QQ-plots for LV45"){#fig:reg:nulls:qqplot:lv45 tag="S4" width="80%"}

![
**QQ-plots for LV800 on random phenotypes.**
Among the top 1% of genes in this LV, 16 are located in band 19q13.43, 9 in 19p13.2 and 9 in 19q13.31.
](images/gls/null_sims/models_lv800.png "QQ-plots for LV800"){#fig:reg:nulls:qqplot:lv800 tag="S5" width="80%"}

![
**QQ-plots for LV914 on random phenotypes.**
Among the top 1% of genes in this LV, 2 are located in band 13q13.3, 2 in 7p15.2 and 2 in 19q13.2.
](images/gls/null_sims/models_lv914.png "QQ-plots for LV914"){#fig:reg:nulls:qqplot:lv914 tag="S6" width="80%"}

![
**QQ-plots of LV-trait associations in real data.**
QQ-plot in PhenomeXcan (left, discovery cohort) across 4,091 traits and 987 LVs, and eMERGE (right, replication cohort) across 309 traits and 987 LVs.
](images/gls/real_data/qqplots.png "QQ-plots in real data"){#fig:reg:real:qqplots tag="S7" width="80%"}


\clearpage

### CRISPR-Cas9

![
**EVOS Fluorescence Microscope Image Capture.**
A. HepG2_lentiV2_Ctrl with no-viral transduction.
B. HepG2_lentiV2 with viral transduction.
Both no-viral transduction Control (A) and lentiviral transduction (B) HepG2 cells were stained with LipidSpot™488.
The CRISPR screening process was performed once, but we conducted two selections (high and low fluorescence) with a control of no/before selection. Subsequently, we generated three technical replicates for the DNA-seq libraries under each condition. In order to mitigate false positives resulting from the single-screen process, we overlapped the candidates from multiple pairwise differential analyses and selected the genes that were consistent between selections.
](images/crispr/figure1.png "EVOS Fluorescence Microscope Image Capture"){#fig:sup:crispr:fig1 tag="S8" width="80%"}


![
**Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorting Gate Setting.**
A. HepG2_UnStained WT.
B. HepG2_lentiV2 with viral transduction stained with LipidSpot™488.
HepG2_lentiV2 cells were FAC sorted, 20% of GFP-High and 20% of GFP-Low cell populations were collected.
](images/crispr/figure2.png "Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorting Gate Setting"){#fig:sup:crispr:fig2 tag="S9" width="80%"}


![
**Verification of sgRNA cassette and lentiV2 transgene.**
A. 20nt sgRNA cassette was verified in lentiV2 transduced genomic DNA population, 163 bp PCR product obtained, while WT HepG2 didn’t possess the cassette, thus, no PCR product.
B. lentiviral-specific transgene WPRE was verified in lentiV2 transduced genomic DNA population, while no transduced WT didn’t have the transgene, therefore, no 173 bp PCR product observed.
For both panels A and B, 100 bp ladder was used in Lane 0.
The CRISPR screening process was performed once, but we conducted two selections (high and low fluorescence) with a control of no/before selection. Subsequently, we generated three technical replicates for the DNA-seq libraries under each condition. In order to mitigate false positives resulting from the single-screen process, we overlapped the candidates from multiple pairwise differential analyses and selected the genes that were consistent between selections.
](images/crispr/figure3.png "Verification of sgRNA cassette and lentiV2 transgene"){#fig:sup:crispr:fig3 tag="S10" width="80%"}


![
**Primers for generating illumina libraries.**
Sequences are provided in a readable format in Supplementary Data 8.
](images/crispr/table1.png "Primers for Generating Illumina Libraries"){#fig:sup:crispr:table1 tag="S11" width="80%"}


![
**Illumina library generation.**
A. Construct for generating Illumina libraries.
B. Final Illumina library from HS DNA ---showed a single ~285bp peak was generated.
The CRISPR screening process was performed once, but we conducted two selections (high and low fluorescence) with a control of no/before selection. Subsequently, we generated three technical replicates for the DNA-seq libraries under each condition. In order to mitigate false positives resulting from the single-screen process, we overlapped the candidates from multiple pairwise differential analyses and selected the genes that were consistent between selections.
](images/crispr/figure4.png "Illumina library generation"){#fig:sup:crispr:fig4 tag="S12" width="80%"}



\clearpage

### Gene modules enrichment for lipids gene-sets

<!-- lipids_gene_sets:modules_enriched_increase:start -->
| Gene module   | Lipids gene-set   | Leading edge      | p-value   |
|:--------------|:------------------|:------------------|:----------|
| **LV246**     | increase          | *DGAT2*, *ACACA*  | 0.0035    |
| LV702         | increase          | *ACACA*, *DGAT2*  | 0.0046    |
| **LV607**     | increase          | *ACACA*, *DGAT2*  | 0.0058    |
| LV890         | increase          | *ACACA*, *DGAT2*  | 0.0067    |
| **LV74**      | increase          | *MBTPS1*, *DGAT2* | 0.0078    |
| **LV865**     | increase          | *ACACA*, *DGAT2*  | 0.0092    |
| LV841         | increase          | *ACACA*, *DGAT2*  | 0.0096    |

Table: Gene modules (LVs) nominally enriched (using FGSEA [@doi:10.1101/060012]) for the lipids-increasing gene-set from the CRISPR-screen (unadjusted $p$-values < 0.01).
LVs significantly aligned with pathways (FDR < 0.05) from the MultiPLIER models are shown in boldface. {#tbl:sup:lipids_crispr:modules_enriched_increase tag="S1"}
<!-- lipids_gene_sets:modules_enriched_increase:end -->


<!-- lipids_gene_sets:modules_enriched_decrease:start -->
| Gene module   | Lipids gene-set   | Leading edge       | p-value   |
|:--------------|:------------------|:-------------------|:----------|
| LV520         | decrease          | *FBXW7*, *TCF7L2*  | 0.0006    |
| LV801         | decrease          | *UBE2J2*, *TCF7L2* | 0.0022    |
| LV512         | decrease          | *FBXW7*, *TCF7L2*  | 0.0025    |
| **LV612**     | decrease          | *PTEN*, *FBXW7*    | 0.0036    |
| LV41          | decrease          | *PCYT2*, *TCF7L2*  | 0.0041    |
| **LV838**     | decrease          | *UBE2J2*, *TCF7L2* | 0.0070    |
| LV302         | decrease          | *TCF7L2*, *PTEN*   | 0.0083    |
| LV959         | decrease          | *TCF7L2*, *PTEN*   | 0.0092    |

Table: Gene modules (LVs) nominally enriched (using FGSEA [@doi:10.1101/060012]) for the lipids-decreasing gene-set from the CRISPR-screen (unadjusted $p$-values < 0.01).
LVs significantly aligned with pathways (FDR < 0.05) from the MultiPLIER models are shown in boldface. {#tbl:sup:lipids_crispr:modules_enriched_decrease tag="S2"}
<!-- lipids_gene_sets:modules_enriched_decrease:end -->


\clearpage

### Supplementary Note 2: Cluster analyses under the null hypothesis of no structure in the data {#sm:clustering:null_sim}

For our clustering pipeline, we simulated different escenarios where there is no structure in the input data matrix $\hat{\mathbf{M}}$ (gene-trait associations from PhenomeXcan projected into the latent gene expression representation).
For this, we simulated two cases where any groupings of traits are removed:
1) the gene-trait association matrix $\mathbf{M}$ (from S-MultiXcan) does not have any meaningful structure to find groups of traits, while preserving the latent variables in $\mathbf{Z}$ from the MultiPLIER models;
and 2) the latent variables in matrix $\mathbf{Z}$ does not have any meaningful structure to find groups of traits, while preserving the gene-trait association matrix $\mathbf{M}$.

For the first scenario, we shuffled genes in $\mathbf{M}$ for each trait, and this randomized matrix was then projected into the latent space.
For the second scenario, we projected matrix $\mathbf{M}$ into the latent space, and then shuffled LVs in $\hat{\mathbf{M}}$ for each trait.
For each of these scenarios, we ran exactly the same clustering pipeline we used for the real data ([Methods](#sec:methods:clustering)), generating an ensemble of partitions that was later combined using the same consensus functions to derive the final partitions of traits.
Finally, we computed
1) stability statistics on the ensemble partitions from different algorithms
and 2) the agreement of the final consensus partition with the ensemble.


![
**Agreement of consensus partitions with ensemble.**
A real and two simulated scenarios with no data structure are shown.
For each scenario, one final consensus partition was derived for each $k$ from 2 to 60 ($x$-axis) following our clustering pipeline.
For each partition, the agreement with the corresponding ensemble was computed using the ARI ($y$-axis).
For the real data scenario, partitions with an agreement above the 75th percentile (dashed line) were selected for follow-up analyses in the main text.
](images/clustering/selected_best_partitions_by_k.svg "Agreement of consensus partitions with ensemble"){#fig:sup:clustering:agreement tag="S13" width="100%"}


The results of this analysis (Figure @fig:sup:clustering:agreement) show that, under the two simulated null scenarios, the agreement of the consensus partitions with the ensemble is very close to zero.
This means, as expected, that there is no consensus among ensemble partitions generated with different clustering algorithms and data representations.
In contrast, using the real data, the consensus clustering approach finds trait pairs that are grouped together across the different members of the ensemble.
The partitions above the 75th percentile were considered in the main analyses, and are shown in the clustering tree in Figure @fig:clustering:tree.


\clearpage

### Cluster-specific and general transcriptional processes associated with disease

![
**Cluster-specific and general transcriptional processes associated with disease using novel LVs.**
The plot shows a submatrix of $\hat{\mathbf{M}}$ for the main trait clusters at $k$=29, considering only LVs (rows) that are not aligned with any pathway.
Standardized values from -6 (lighter color) to 21 (darker color).
](images/clustering/global_clustermap-novel-plain.svg "Heatmap with novel gene modules and traits"){#fig:sup:clustering:novel:heatmap tag="S14" width="100%"}


\clearpage

### Latent variables (gene modules) information

#### LV603

<!-- LV603:multiplier_pathways:start -->
| Pathway                             | AUC   | FDR      |
|:------------------------------------|:------|:---------|
| IRIS Neutrophil-Resting             | 0.91  | 4.51e-35 |
| SVM Neutrophils                     | 0.98  | 1.43e-09 |
| PID IL8CXCR2 PATHWAY                | 0.81  | 7.04e-03 |
| SIG PIP3 SIGNALING IN B LYMPHOCYTES | 0.77  | 1.95e-02 |

Table: Pathways aligned to LV603 from the MultiPLIER models. {#tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv603 tag="S3"}
<!-- LV603:multiplier_pathways:end -->

<!-- LV603:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:start -->
| Trait description                         | Sample size   | Cases   | FDR            |
|:------------------------------------------|:--------------|:--------|:---------------|
| Basophill percentage                      | 349,861       |         | 1.19e&#8209;10 |
| Basophill count                           | 349,856       |         | 1.89e&#8209;05 |
| Treatment/medication code: ispaghula husk | 361,141       | 327     | 1.36e&#8209;02 |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV603 in PhenomeXcan. {#tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv603 tag="S4"}
<!-- LV603:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:end -->

<!-- LV603:emerge_traits_assocs:start -->
| Phecode                     | Trait description   | Sample size   | Cases   | FDR   |
|:----------------------------|:--------------------|:--------------|:--------|:------|
| No significant associations |                     |               |         |       |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV603 in eMERGE. {#tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv603 tag="S5"}
<!-- LV603:emerge_traits_assocs:end -->

\clearpage

#### LV246

<!-- LV246:multiplier_pathways:start -->
| Pathway                                                        | AUC   | FDR      |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------|:------|:---------|
| REACTOME FATTY ACID TRIACYLGLYCEROL AND KETONE BODY METABOLISM | 0.89  | 3.97e-16 |
| REACTOME METABOLISM OF LIPIDS AND LIPOPROTEINS                 | 0.67  | 1.14e-08 |
| REACTOME TRIGLYCERIDE BIOSYNTHESIS                             | 0.86  | 6.52e-04 |
| KEGG PYRUVATE METABOLISM                                       | 0.82  | 2.66e-03 |
| KEGG PROPANOATE METABOLISM                                     | 0.83  | 4.27e-03 |

Table: Pathways aligned to LV246 from the MultiPLIER models. {#tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv246 tag="S6"}
<!-- LV246:multiplier_pathways:end -->

<!-- LV246:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:start -->
| Trait description                                                                                       | Sample size   | Cases         | FDR            |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------|:--------------|:---------------|
| Triglycerides NMR                                                                          | 21,559        |         | 1.66e&#8209;26 |
| LDL Cholesterol NMR                                                                        | 13,527        |         | 3.92e&#8209;26 |
| High cholesterol (self-reported)                                                           | 361,141       | 43,957  | 1.08e&#8209;24 |
| Cholesterol lowering medication                                                            | 193,148       | 24,247  | 4.28e&#8209;24 |
| Treatment/medication code: simvastatin                                                     | 361,141       | 40,921  | 2.56e&#8209;19 |
| CH2DB NMR                                                                                  | 24,154        |         | 1.05e&#8209;15 |
| Cholesterol lowering medication                                                            | 165,340       | 38,057  | 9.58e&#8209;15 |
| Treatment/medication code: atorvastatin                                                    | 361,141       | 10,805  | 2.54e&#8209;14 |
| Illnesses of mother: Alzheimer's disease/dementia                                          | 331,041       | 28,507  | 2.76e&#8209;08 |
| Illnesses of father: Alzheimer's disease/dementia                                          | 312,666       | 15,022  | 2.76e&#8209;08 |
| Alzheimers Disease                                                                         | 54,162        | 17,008  | 1.10e&#8209;07 |
| Non-butter spread type details: Flora Pro-Active or Benecol                                | 190,094       | 29,048  | 5.63e&#8209;07 |
| Illnesses of siblings: Alzheimer's disease/dementia                                        | 279,062       | 1,609   | 6.16e&#8209;07 |
| Any dementia                                                                               | 361,194       | 243     | 2.86e&#8209;05 |
| Illnesses of father: None of the above (group 1)                                           | 314,797       | 116,736 | 3.56e&#8209;05 |
| Medication for cholesterol, blood pressure, diabetes, or take exogenous hormones (females) | 193,148       | 133,338 | 1.10e&#8209;04 |
| Treatment/medication code: lipitor 10mg tablet                                             | 361,141       | 2,584   | 1.55e&#8209;04 |
| Treatment/medication code: rosuvastatin                                                    | 361,141       | 2,227   | 1.37e&#8209;03 |
| Illnesses of father: Heart disease                                                         | 318,570       | 104,110 | 1.89e&#8209;03 |
| Dementia                                                                                   | 361,194       | 157     | 9.58e&#8209;03 |
| Mother still alive                                                                         | 355,029       | 140,246 | 1.76e&#8209;02 |
| Job SOC coding: Librarians                                                                 | 91,149        | 1,248   | 3.22e&#8209;02 |
| Alzheimer’s disease                                                                        | 361,194       | 119     | 3.61e&#8209;02 |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV246 in PhenomeXcan. {#tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv246 tag="S7"}
<!-- LV246:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:end -->

<!-- LV246:emerge_traits_assocs:start -->
| Phecode   | Trait description              | Sample size   | Cases   | FDR            |
|:----------|:-------------------------------|:--------------|:--------|:---------------|
| 272.11    | Hypercholesterolemia           | 40,786        | 14,138  | 4.40e&#8209;09 |
| 272.1     | Hyperlipidemia                 | 55,843        | 29,195  | 3.57e&#8209;07 |
| 272       | Disorders of lipoid metabolism | 55,892        | 29,244  | 3.79e&#8209;07 |
| 292.3     | Memory loss                    | 48,785        | 2,094   | 1.80e&#8209;02 |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV246 in eMERGE. {#tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv246 tag="S8"}
<!-- LV246:emerge_traits_assocs:end -->

\clearpage

#### LV116

<!-- LV116:multiplier_pathways:start -->
| Pathway                                              | AUC   | FDR      |
|:-----------------------------------------------------|:------|:---------|
| REACTOME INTERFERON SIGNALING                        | 0.84  | 3.48e-09 |
| SVM Macrophages M1                                   | 0.92  | 2.09e-05 |
| REACTOME INTERFERON ALPHA BETA SIGNALING             | 0.94  | 3.36e-05 |
| REACTOME CYTOKINE SIGNALING IN IMMUNE SYSTEM         | 0.67  | 1.53e-04 |
| IRIS DendriticCell-LPSstimulated                     | 0.65  | 1.09e-03 |
| KEGG CYTOSOLIC DNA SENSING PATHWAY                   | 0.84  | 3.22e-03 |
| REACTOME NEGATIVE REGULATORS OF RIG I MDA5 SIGNALING | 0.81  | 1.61e-02 |

Table: Pathways aligned to LV116 from the MultiPLIER models. {#tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv116 tag="S9"}
<!-- LV116:multiplier_pathways:end -->

\clearpage

#### LV931


<!-- LV931:multiplier_pathways:start -->
| Pathway          | AUC   | FDR      |
|:-----------------|:------|:---------|
| MIPS SPLICEOSOME | 0.63  | 3.13e-02 |
| PID TGFBRPATHWAY | 0.71  | 3.99e-02 |

Table: Pathways aligned to LV931 from the MultiPLIER models. {#tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv931 tag="S10"}
<!-- LV931:multiplier_pathways:end -->

![
**Cell types for LV931.**
<!--  -->
](images/lvs_analysis/lv931/lv931-cell_types.svg "Cell types for LV931"){#fig:sup:lv931 tag="S15" width="80%"}

\clearpage

#### LV66

<!-- LV66:multiplier_pathways:start -->
| Pathway                                        | AUC   | FDR      |
|:-----------------------------------------------|:------|:---------|
| REACTOME METABOLISM OF LIPIDS AND LIPOPROTEINS | 0.62  | 3.12e-04 |

Table: Pathways aligned to LV66 from the MultiPLIER models. {#tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv66 tag="S11"}
<!-- LV66:multiplier_pathways:end -->

![
**Cell types for LV66.**
<!--  -->
](images/lvs_analysis/lv66/lv66-cell_types.svg "Cell types for LV66"){#fig:sup:lv66 tag="S16" width="80%"}

\clearpage

#### LV928

<!-- LV928:multiplier_pathways:start -->
| Pathway   | AUC   | FDR      |
|:----------|:------|:---------|
| DMAP ERY3 | 0.81  | 1.16e-24 |
| DMAP ERY4 | 0.78  | 2.49e-17 |

Table: Pathways aligned to LV928 from the MultiPLIER models. {#tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv928 tag="S12"}
<!-- LV928:multiplier_pathways:end -->

<!-- LV928:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:start -->
| Trait description                               | Sample size   | Cases   | FDR            |
|:------------------------------------------------|:--------------|:--------|:---------------|
| Mean sphered cell volume                        | 344,729       |         | 1.60e&#8209;20 |
| Mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration      | 350,468       |         | 1.42e&#8209;17 |
| Mean reticulocyte volume                        | 344,728       |         | 1.77e&#8209;17 |
| Reticulocyte count                              | 344,729       |         | 2.28e&#8209;10 |
| Reticulocyte percentage                         | 344,728       |         | 1.37e&#8209;09 |
| Red blood cell (erythrocyte) distribution width | 350,473       |         | 2.90e&#8209;09 |
| Reticulocyte Count                              | 173,480       |         | 1.09e&#8209;07 |
| Mean corpuscular volume                         | 350,473       |         | 1.46e&#8209;03 |
| High light scatter reticulocyte count           | 344,729       |         | 3.49e&#8209;03 |
| Age at first episode of depression              | 61,033        |         | 1.33e&#8209;02 |
| High Light Scatter Reticulocyte Count           | 173,480       |         | 1.48e&#8209;02 |
| Mean corpuscular haemoglobin                    | 350,472       |         | 4.02e&#8209;02 |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV928 in PhenomeXcan. {#tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv928 tag="S13"}
<!-- LV928:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:end -->

<!-- LV928:emerge_traits_assocs:start -->
| Phecode                     | Trait description   | Sample size   | Cases   | FDR   |
|:----------------------------|:--------------------|:--------------|:--------|:------|
| No significant associations |                     |               |         |       |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV928 in eMERGE. {#tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv928 tag="S14"}
<!-- LV928:emerge_traits_assocs:end -->

![
**Cell types for LV928.**
<!--  -->
](images/lvs_analysis/lv928/lv928-cell_types.svg "Cell types for LV928"){#fig:sup:lv928 tag="S17" width="80%"}

\clearpage

#### LV30

<!-- LV30:multiplier_pathways:start -->
| Pathway   | AUC   | FDR      |
|:----------|:------|:---------|
| DMAP ERY3 | 0.95  | 5.62e-52 |
| DMAP ERY4 | 0.98  | 5.28e-51 |
| DMAP ERY5 | 0.98  | 1.96e-49 |

Table: Pathways aligned to LV30 from the MultiPLIER models. {#tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv30 tag="S15"}
<!-- LV30:multiplier_pathways:end -->

<!-- LV30:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:start -->
| Trait description                                         | Sample size   | Cases   | FDR            |
|:----------------------------------------------------------|:--------------|:--------|:---------------|
| Mean reticulocyte volume                                  | 344,728       |         | 1.09e&#8209;32 |
| Mean sphered cell volume                                  | 344,729       |         | 1.38e&#8209;24 |
| Reticulocyte Count                                        | 173,480       |         | 6.28e&#8209;18 |
| Reticulocyte percentage                                   | 344,728       |         | 1.27e&#8209;17 |
| Mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration                | 350,468       |         | 1.62e&#8209;17 |
| Reticulocyte count                                        | 344,729       |         | 1.62e&#8209;17 |
| High light scatter reticulocyte count                     | 344,729       |         | 4.78e&#8209;11 |
| High Light Scatter Reticulocyte Count                     | 173,480       |         | 8.49e&#8209;11 |
| Immature reticulocyte fraction                            | 344,728       |         | 4.31e&#8209;10 |
| High light scatter reticulocyte percentage                | 344,729       |         | 1.21e&#8209;05 |
| Mean corpuscular volume                                   | 350,473       |         | 2.28e&#8209;05 |
| Red blood cell (erythrocyte) distribution width           | 350,473       |         | 3.00e&#8209;05 |
| Mean platelet (thrombocyte) volume                        | 350,470       |         | 6.75e&#8209;04 |
| Mean corpuscular haemoglobin                              | 350,472       |         | 3.90e&#8209;03 |
| Illnesses of adopted mother: Chronic bronchitis/emphysema | 2,938         | 238     | 1.92e&#8209;02 |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV30 in PhenomeXcan. {#tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv30 tag="S16"}
<!-- LV30:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:end -->

<!-- LV30:emerge_traits_assocs:start -->
| Phecode                     | Trait description   | Sample size   | Cases   | FDR   |
|:----------------------------|:--------------------|:--------------|:--------|:------|
| No significant associations |                     |               |         |       |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV30 in eMERGE. {#tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv30 tag="S17"}
<!-- LV30:emerge_traits_assocs:end -->

![
**Cell types for LV30.**
<!--  -->
](images/lvs_analysis/lv30/lv30-cell_types.svg "Cell types for LV30"){#fig:sup:lv30 tag="S18" width="80%"}

\clearpage

#### LV730

<!-- LV730:multiplier_pathways:start -->
| Pathway    | AUC   | FDR      |
|:-----------|:------|:---------|
| DMAP MEGA2 | 0.82  | 2.64e-05 |

Table: Pathways aligned to LV730 from the MultiPLIER models. {#tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv730 tag="S18"}
<!-- LV730:multiplier_pathways:end -->

<!-- LV730:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:start -->
| Trait description                                                 | Sample size   | Cases   | FDR            |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------|:--------|:---------------|
| Platelet distribution width                                       | 350,470       |         | 1.13e&#8209;10 |
| Mean platelet (thrombocyte) volume                                | 350,470       |         | 3.47e&#8209;04 |
| Reason former drinker stopped drinking alcohol: Financial reasons | 12,110        | 233     | 3.71e&#8209;02 |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV730 in PhenomeXcan. {#tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv730 tag="S19"}
<!-- LV730:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:end -->

<!-- LV730:emerge_traits_assocs:start -->
| Phecode                     | Trait description   | Sample size   | Cases   | FDR   |
|:----------------------------|:--------------------|:--------------|:--------|:------|
| No significant associations |                     |               |         |       |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV730 in eMERGE. {#tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv730 tag="S20"}
<!-- LV730:emerge_traits_assocs:end -->

![
**Cell types for LV730.**
<!--  -->
](images/lvs_analysis/lv730/lv730-cell_types.svg "Cell types for LV730"){#fig:sup:lv730 tag="S19" width="80%"}

\clearpage

#### LV598

<!-- LV598:multiplier_pathways:start -->
| Pathway                     | AUC   | FDR      |
|:----------------------------|:------|:---------|
| PID SYNDECAN 1 PATHWAY      | 0.81  | 1.20e-02 |
| REACTOME COLLAGEN FORMATION | 0.77  | 1.89e-02 |

Table: Pathways aligned to LV598 from the MultiPLIER models. {#tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv598 tag="S21"}
<!-- LV598:multiplier_pathways:end -->

<!-- LV598:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:start -->
| Trait description                                       | Sample size   | Cases   | FDR            |
|:--------------------------------------------------------|:--------------|:--------|:---------------|
| Corneal resistance factor (right)                       | 76,630        |         | 4.05e&#8209;04 |
| Corneal resistance factor (left)                        | 76,510        |         | 1.86e&#8209;03 |
| 6mm strong meridian (left)                              | 65,551        |         | 2.58e&#8209;03 |
| Corneal hysteresis (right)                              | 76,630        |         | 1.21e&#8209;02 |
| 6mm strong meridian (right)                             | 66,256        |         | 2.18e&#8209;02 |
| Treatment/medication code: evening primrose oil product | 361,141       | 814     | 2.58e&#8209;02 |
| 6mm weak meridian (left)                                | 65,551        |         | 3.67e&#8209;02 |
| Hand grip strength (left)                               | 359,704       |         | 4.15e&#8209;02 |
| 3mm strong meridian (left)                              | 75,398        |         | 4.74e&#8209;02 |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV598 in PhenomeXcan. {#tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv598 tag="S22"}
<!-- LV598:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:end -->

<!-- LV598:emerge_traits_assocs:start -->
| Phecode                     | Trait description   | Sample size   | Cases   | FDR   |
|:----------------------------|:--------------------|:--------------|:--------|:------|
| No significant associations |                     |               |         |       |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV598 in eMERGE. {#tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv598 tag="S23"}
<!-- LV598:emerge_traits_assocs:end -->

![
**Cell types for LV598.**
<!--  -->
](images/lvs_analysis/lv598/lv598-cell_types.svg "Cell types for LV598"){#fig:sup:lv598 tag="S20" width="80%"}

\clearpage

#### LV57

<!-- LV57:multiplier_pathways:start -->
| Pathway                                | AUC   | FDR      |
|:---------------------------------------|:------|:---------|
| KEGG T CELL RECEPTOR SIGNALING PATHWAY | 0.70  | 1.26e-03 |
| SVM T cells CD4 memory activated       | 0.79  | 2.59e-03 |
| IRIS CD4Tcell-Th2-restimulated12hour   | 0.78  | 7.57e-03 |
| KEGG ALLOGRAFT REJECTION               | 1.00  | 1.09e-02 |
| Custom Treg                            | 0.98  | 1.37e-02 |
| PID NFAT TFPATHWAY                     | 0.74  | 1.52e-02 |
| IRIS MemoryTcell-RO-activated          | 0.70  | 2.87e-02 |

Table: Pathways aligned to LV57 from the MultiPLIER models. {#tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv57 tag="S24"}
<!-- LV57:multiplier_pathways:end -->

<!-- LV57:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:start -->
| Trait description                                                                                       | Sample size   | Cases         | FDR            |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------|:--------------|:---------------|
| Non-cancer illness code, self-reported: deep venous thrombosis (dvt)                                                       | 361,141       | 7,237         | 1.76e&#8209;13 |
| Blood clot, DVT, bronchitis, emphysema, asthma, rhinitis, eczema, allergy diagnosed by doctor: Blood clot in the leg (DVT) | 360,527       | 7,386         | 1.22e&#8209;12 |
| Diagnoses - main ICD10: I80 Phlebitis and thrombophlebitis                                                                 | 361,194       | 2,289         | 7.62e&#8209;12 |
| DVT of lower extremities                                                                                                   | 361,194       | 2,116         | 1.27e&#8209;09 |
| Venous thromboembolism                                                                                                     | 361,194       | 4,620         | 2.28e&#8209;08 |
| DVT of lower extremities and pulmonary embolism                                                                            | 361,194       | 4,319         | 4.36e&#8209;08 |
| Inflammatory Bowel Disease                                                                                                 | 34,652        | 12,882        | 1.95e&#8209;05 |
| hypothyroidism (self-reported)                                                                                             | 361,141       | 17,574        | 3.84e&#8209;05 |
| Medication: levothyroxine sodium                                                                                           | 361,141       | 14,689        | 8.43e&#8209;05 |
| Mouth/teeth dental problems: Mouth ulcers                                                                                  | 359,841       | 36,831        | 1.02e&#8209;03 |
| Crohns Disease                                                                                                             | 20,833        | 5,956         | 1.02e&#8209;02 |
| Facial ageing                                                                                                              | 330,409       |               | 1.04e&#8209;02 |
| Ulcerative Colitis                                                                                                         | 27,432        | 6,968         | 1.27e&#8209;02 |
| Hair colour (natural, before greying): Black                                                                               | 360,270       | 15,809        | 1.99e&#8209;02 |
| Hair colour (natural, before greying): Light brown                                                                         | 360,270       | 147,560       | 4.69e&#8209;02 |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV57 in PhenomeXcan. {#tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv57 tag="S25"}
<!-- LV57:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:end -->

<!-- LV57:emerge_traits_assocs:start -->
| Phecode   | Trait description                    | Sample size   | Cases         | FDR            |
|:----------|:-------------------------------------|:--------------|:--------------|:---------------|
| 286       | Coagulation defects                  | 50,182        | 2,976         | 1.33e&#8209;11 |
| 452       | Other venous embolism and thrombosis | 40,476        | 3,816         | 1.52e&#8209;05 |
| 452.2     | Deep vein thrombosis [DVT]           | 38,791        | 2,131         | 4.47e&#8209;05 |
| 244.4     | Hypothyroidism NOS                   | 53,968        | 9,284         | 1.12e&#8209;02 |
| 244       | Hypothyroidism                       | 54,404        | 9,720         | 1.42e&#8209;02 |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV57 in eMERGE. {#tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv57 tag="S26"}
<!-- LV57:emerge_traits_assocs:end -->

![
**Cell types for LV57.**
](images/lvs_analysis/lv57/lv57-cell_types.svg "Cell types for LV57"){#fig:sup:lv57 tag="S21" width="80%"}

\clearpage

#### LV844

<!-- LV844:multiplier_pathways:start -->
| Pathway                                  | AUC   | FDR      |
|:-----------------------------------------|:------|:---------|
| KEGG ANTIGEN PROCESSING AND PRESENTATION | 0.80  | 1.35e-03 |

Table: Pathways aligned to LV844 from the MultiPLIER models. {#tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv844 tag="S27"}
<!-- LV844:multiplier_pathways:end -->

<!-- LV844:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:start -->
| Trait description                                               | Sample size   | Cases         | FDR            |
|:----------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------|:--------------|:---------------|
| Non-cancer illness code, self-reported: polymyalgia rheumatica  | 361,141       | 753           | 5.22e&#8209;06 |
| Non-cancer illness code, self-reported: type 1 diabetes         | 361,141       | 318           | 4.71e&#8209;05 |
| Type 1 diabetes with ketoacidosis                               | 361,194       | 168           | 1.03e&#8209;04 |
| Age diabetes diagnosed                                          | 16,166        |               | 3.86e&#8209;04 |
| Milk type used: Other type of milk                              | 360,806       | 4,213         | 5.48e&#8209;04 |
| Non-cancer illness code, self-reported: appendicitis            | 361,141       | 3,058         | 6.12e&#8209;04 |
| Diabetic ketoacidosis                                           | 361,194       | 234           | 7.13e&#8209;04 |
| Rheumatoid Arthritis                                            | 80,799        | 19,234        | 7.46e&#8209;04 |
| Type 1 diabetes without complications                           | 361,194       | 247           | 1.05e&#8209;03 |
| Started insulin within one year diagnosis of diabetes           | 16,415        | 1,999         | 1.30e&#8209;03 |
| Insulin medication (males)                                      | 165,340       | 2,248         | 3.61e&#8209;03 |
| Medication: insulin product                                     | 361,141       | 3,545         | 5.48e&#8209;03 |
| Insulin medication (females)                                    | 193,148       | 1,476         | 7.93e&#8209;03 |
| Type 1 diabetes                                                 | 361,194       | 583           | 1.04e&#8209;02 |
| Diagnoses - main ICD10: E10 Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus | 361,194       | 470           | 1.08e&#8209;02 |
| Treatment/medication code: sulfasalazine                        | 361,141       | 710           | 1.10e&#8209;02 |
| malabsorption/coeliac disease (self-reported)                   | 361,141       | 1,587         | 3.12e&#8209;02 |
| Job coding: school inspector, education inspector               | 89,866        | 238           | 3.71e&#8209;02 |
| Seropositive rheumatoid arthritis                               | 361,194       | 327           | 3.86e&#8209;02 |
| Non-cancer illness code, self-reported: rheumatoid arthritis    | 361,141       | 4,017         | 4.21e&#8209;02 |
| Age hayfever or allergic rhinitis diagnosed by doctor           | 20,904        |               | 4.44e&#8209;02 |
| Other/unspecified seropositiverheumatoid arthritis              | 361,194       | 299           | 4.88e&#8209;02 |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV844 in PhenomeXcan. {#tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv844 tag="S28"}
<!-- LV844:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:end -->

<!-- LV844:emerge_traits_assocs:start -->
| Phecode                     | Trait description   | Sample size   | Cases   | FDR   |
|:----------------------------|:--------------------|:--------------|:--------|:------|
| No significant associations |                     |               |         |       |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV844 in eMERGE. {#tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv844 tag="S29"}
<!-- LV844:emerge_traits_assocs:end -->

![
**Cell types for LV844.**
](images/lvs_analysis/lv844/lv844-cell_types.svg "Cell types for LV844"){#fig:sup:lv844 tag="S22" width="80%"}

\clearpage

#### LV136

<!-- LV136:multiplier_pathways:start -->
| Pathway                       | AUC   | FDR      |
|:------------------------------|:------|:---------|
| PID INTEGRIN1 PATHWAY         | 0.88  | 9.35e-06 |
| KEGG ECM RECEPTOR INTERACTION | 0.80  | 7.29e-05 |
| REACTOME COLLAGEN FORMATION   | 0.87  | 2.00e-04 |
| REACTOME MUSCLE CONTRACTION   | 0.75  | 1.49e-02 |

Table: Pathways aligned to LV136 from the MultiPLIER models. {#tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv136 tag="S30"}
<!-- LV136:multiplier_pathways:end -->

<!-- LV136:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:start -->
| Trait description                                               | Sample size   | Cases         | FDR            |
|:----------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------|:--------------|:---------------|
| Coronary atherosclerosis                                        | 361,194       | 14,334        | 1.84e&#8209;09 |
| Chronic ischaemic heart disease (ICD10 I25)                     | 361,194       | 12,769        | 3.52e&#8209;09 |
| Ischaemic heart disease (wide definition)                       | 361,194       | 20,857        | 3.95e&#8209;08 |
| Coronary Artery Disease                                         | 184,305       | 60,801        | 4.18e&#8209;08 |
| 3mm strong meridian (right)                                     | 75,410        |               | 5.54e&#8209;05 |
| 6mm strong meridian (left)                                      | 65,551        |               | 1.35e&#8209;04 |
| Corneal resistance factor (right)                               | 76,630        |               | 2.02e&#8209;04 |
| 6mm strong meridian (right)                                     | 66,256        |               | 2.58e&#8209;04 |
| Heart attack                                                    | 360,420       | 8,288         | 3.75e&#8209;04 |
| Myocardial infarction                                           | 361,194       | 7,018         | 4.85e&#8209;04 |
| Myocardial infarction, strict                                   | 361,194       | 7,018         | 4.85e&#8209;04 |
| 3mm strong meridian (left)                                      | 75,398        |               | 6.65e&#8209;04 |
| heart attack/myocardial infarction (self-reported)              | 361,141       | 8,239         | 1.07e&#8209;03 |
| 6mm weak meridian (left)                                        | 65,551        |               | 1.10e&#8209;03 |
| 6mm weak meridian (right)                                       | 66,256        |               | 1.61e&#8209;03 |
| Acute myocardial infarction (ICD10 I21)                         | 361,194       | 5,948         | 2.24e&#8209;03 |
| 3mm weak meridian (right)                                       | 75,410        |               | 3.69e&#8209;03 |
| 3mm weak meridian (left)                                        | 75,398        |               | 3.96e&#8209;03 |
| Intra-ocular pressure, Goldmann-correlated (right)              | 76,630        |               | 8.64e&#8209;03 |
| 6mm asymmetry angle (right)                                     | 41,390        |               | 1.03e&#8209;02 |
| Corneal resistance factor (left)                                | 76,510        |               | 1.03e&#8209;02 |
| Other specified disorders of muscle                             | 361,194       | 257           | 1.09e&#8209;02 |
| Major coronary heart disease event excluding revascularizations | 361,194       | 10,157        | 2.44e&#8209;02 |
| Major coronary heart disease event                              | 361,194       | 10,157        | 2.44e&#8209;02 |
| Non-cancer illness code, self-reported: angina                  | 361,141       | 11,370        | 4.53e&#8209;02 |
| Eye problems/disorders: Glaucoma                                | 117,890       | 5,092         | 4.94e&#8209;02 |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV136 in PhenomeXcan. {#tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv136 tag="S31"}
<!-- LV136:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:end -->

<!-- LV136:emerge_traits_assocs:start -->
| Phecode   | Trait description        | Sample size   | Cases   | FDR            |
|:----------|:-------------------------|:--------------|:--------|:---------------|
| 411.4     | Coronary atherosclerosis | 52,836        | 13,715  | 1.42e&#8209;03 |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV136 in eMERGE. {#tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv136 tag="S32"}
<!-- LV136:emerge_traits_assocs:end -->

![
**Cell types for LV136.**
<!--  -->
Pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells were exposed to hypoxia for 24 hours or more [@url:https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA232177];
](images/lvs_analysis/lv136/lv136-cell_types.svg "Cell types for LV136"){#fig:sup:lv136 tag="S23" width="80%"}

\clearpage

#### LV21

<!-- LV21:multiplier_pathways:start -->
| Pathway                            | AUC   | FDR   |
|:-----------------------------------|:------|:------|
| No pathways significantly enriched |       |       |

Table: Pathways aligned to LV21 from the MultiPLIER models. {#tbl:sup:multiplier_pathways:lv21 tag="S33"}
<!-- LV21:multiplier_pathways:end -->

<!-- LV21:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:start -->
| Trait description                                              | Sample size   | Cases         | FDR            |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------|:--------------|:---------------|
| LDL Cholesterol NMR                                            | 13,527        |               | 1.08e&#8209;12 |
| HDL Cholesterol NMR                                            | 19,270        |               | 3.03e&#8209;11 |
| Alzheimers Disease                                             | 54,162        | 17,008        | 1.96e&#8209;09 |
| Triglycerides NMR                                              | 21,559        |               | 2.05e&#8209;09 |
| Illnesses of mother: Alzheimer's disease/dementia              | 331,041       | 28,507        | 1.36e&#8209;08 |
| Illnesses of father: Alzheimer's disease/dementia              | 312,666       | 15,022        | 3.15e&#8209;08 |
| Illnesses of siblings: Alzheimer's disease/dementia            | 279,062       | 1,609         | 1.55e&#8209;07 |
| Any dementia                                                   | 361,194       | 243           | 5.63e&#8209;07 |
| Treatment/medication code: simvastatin                         | 361,141       | 40,921        | 2.88e&#8209;06 |
| Cholesterol lowering medication                                | 193,148       | 24,247        | 4.45e&#8209;05 |
| High cholesterol (self-reported)                               | 361,141       | 43,957        | 9.90e&#8209;05 |
| Cholesterol lowering medication                                | 165,340       | 38,057        | 4.86e&#8209;04 |
| Dementia                                                       | 361,194       | 157           | 9.80e&#8209;04 |
| Alzheimer’s disease                                            | 361,194       | 119           | 1.33e&#8209;03 |
| Mean reticulocyte volume                                       | 344,728       |               | 1.76e&#8209;03 |
| Father's age at death                                          | 266,231       |               | 6.68e&#8209;03 |
| Illnesses of mother: None of the above (group 1)               | 332,611       | 138,291       | 1.42e&#8209;02 |
| ECG, phase time                                                | 53,998        |               | 1.60e&#8209;02 |
| Treatment/medication code: atorvastatin                        | 361,141       | 10,805        | 2.92e&#8209;02 |
| Mean sphered cell volume                                       | 344,729       |               | 3.33e&#8209;02 |
| Non-cancer illness code, self-reported: cellulitis             | 361,141       | 232           | 3.40e&#8209;02 |
| Medication for cholesterol, blood pressure or diabetes (males) | 165,340       | 110,372       | 3.66e&#8209;02 |
| Mother still alive                                             | 355,029       | 140,246       | 4.96e&#8209;02 |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV21 in PhenomeXcan. {#tbl:sup:phenomexcan_assocs:lv21 tag="S34"}
<!-- LV21:phenomexcan_traits_assocs:end -->

<!-- LV21:emerge_traits_assocs:start -->
| Phecode   | Trait description              | Sample size   | Cases         | FDR            |
|:----------|:-------------------------------|:--------------|:--------------|:---------------|
| 272.1     | Hyperlipidemia                 | 55,843        | 29,195        | 4.22e&#8209;03 |
| 272       | Disorders of lipoid metabolism | 55,892        | 29,244        | 4.50e&#8209;03 |

Table: Significant trait associations of LV21 in eMERGE. {#tbl:sup:emerge_assocs:lv21 tag="S35"}
<!-- LV21:emerge_traits_assocs:end -->

![
**Cell types for LV21.**
<!--  -->
](images/lvs_analysis/lv21/lv21-cell_types.svg "Cell types for LV21"){#fig:sup:lv21 tag="S24" width="80%"}
