## Discussion

### Epistasis between germline mutator alleles

We have identified a locus on chromosome 6 that amplifies a C>A germline mutator phenotype in the BXDs, a family of inbred mice derived from the laboratory strains DBA/2J and C57BL/6J. 
DBA/2J (*D*) alleles at this locus have no significant effect on C>A mutation rates in mice that also harbor "wild-type" C57BL/6J (*B*) alleles at a previously discovered mutator locus on chromosome 4 [@PMID:35545679].
However, mice with *D* alleles at *both* loci have even higher mutation rates than those with *D* alleles at the chromosome 4 mutator locus alone (Figure @fig:spectra-comparison). 
Epistatic interactions between mutator alleles have been previously documented in yeast [@PMID:16492773] and in human cell lines [@PMID:35859169], but never to our knowledge in a whole-animal context. 

Importantly, we discovered epistasis between germline mutator alleles in an unnatural population of model organisms that have been inbred by brother-sister mating in a highly controlled laboratory environment [@PMID:33472028]. 
This breeding setup has likely attenuated the effects of natural selection on all but the most deleterious alleles [@doi:10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.39.110707.173437], and may have facilitated the fixation of large-effect mutator alleles that would be less common in wild mice. 
Without fine-mapping the chromosome 6 mutator allele, however, we are unable to trace its origin to either a captive breeding colony of laboratory mice or a wild, outbreeding *Mus musculus* population. 
If the mutator allele on chromosome 6 has even a weak deleterious fitness, there might be a greater likelihood that it arose in captivity. 
Indeed, if purifying selection is required to keep mutation rates low, mutational pressure might cause mutation rates to rise in just a few generations of relaxed selection. 
This dynamic may explain the recent discovery of a large-effect mutator allele in a rhesus macaque research colony [@doi:10.1101/2023.03.27.534460], as well as the observation that domesticated animals tend to have higher mutation rates than those in the wild [@PMID:36859541].
Ultimately, although we have not conclusively fine-mapped the chromosome 6 mutator locus to a causal variant, we argue that nonsynonymous or regulatory variants in the DNA glycosylase *Ogg1* are the best candidates. 


### Protein-coding genes that may underlie the chromosome 6 mutator locus

Five protein-coding genes involved in DNA repair overlap the C>A mutator locus on chromosome 6: *Ogg1*, a glycosylase that excises the oxidative DNA lesion 8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) [@PMID:17581577], *Setmar*, a histone methyltransferase involved in non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) of double-stranded breaks (DSBs) [@PMID:21187428;@PMID:16332963], *Fancd2*, and *Rad18*.
One other DNA repair gene, *Mbd4*, lies just outside of the 90% bootstrap confidence interval on chromosome 6 (but within a 10 Mbp interval around the peak AMSD marker).
We are unable to conclusively determine that one or more of these genes harbors a causal variant underlying the observed C>A mutator phenotype, but we believe that *Ogg1* is the most plausible candidate.
*Ogg1* is a member of the same base-excision repair pathway as *Mutyh* (the gene that likely underlies the chromosome 4 mutator locus), contains a nonsynonymous fixed difference between the C57BL/6J and DBA/2J parental strains, and appears to be regulated by cis-eQTLs across a number of tissues within the BXD cohort.

The C57BL/6J and DBA/2J *Setmar* coding sequences differ by two missense variants (Table @tbl:nonsyn-diffs), one of which is predicted to be deleterious by *in silico* tools.
The primate *SETMAR* ortholog is involved in NHEJ of double-strand breaks, but its role in DNA repair appears to depend on the function of both a SET methyltransferase domain and a *Mariner*-family transposase domain [@PMID:16332963;@PMID:24573677;@PMID:21491884].
Since the murine *Setmar* ortholog lacks the latter element, and because primate *SETMAR* is involved in a DNA repair process that is not expected to affect the rate of C>A mutations, we believe it is unlikely to underlie the epistatic interaction between the chromosome 4 and 6 mutator loci in the BXDs (*Supplementary Information*).
Moreover, we did not observe any significant cis-eQTLs for *Setmar* across a variety of tissues in the BXD cohort (Table @tbl:eqtl-results).
None of the remaining DNA repair genes (*Fancd2* or *Rad18*) contains a nonsynonymous fixed difference between the C57BL/6J and DBA/2J parental strains, and none appear to be regulated by cis-eQTLs that would feasibly lead to a germline C>A mutator phenotype (Table @tbl:eqtl-results); the only significant cis-eQTL we observed was for *Fancd2* in gastrointestinal tissue, at which *D* alleles actually led to *increased* expression.


<!-- We also note that *FANCD2* deficiency in human cancer can lead to increased rates of *de novo* structural variation [@PMID:36450981]. -->

### An *Ogg1* mutator allele might impair the excision of 8-oxoguanine lesions

*Ogg1* is a member of the same base-excision repair (BER) pathway as *Mutyh*, the protein-coding gene we previously implicated as harboring mutator alleles at the locus on chromosome 4 [@PMID:17581577].
Each of these genes has a distinct role in the BER response to oxidative DNA damage, and thereby the prevention of C>A mutations [@PMID:28963982;@PMID:24732879].
Following damage by reactive oxygen species, *Ogg1* is able to recognize and remove 8-oxoguanine lesions that are base-paired with cytosine nucleotides; once 8-oxoG is excised, other members of the BER pathway are mobilized to restore a proper G:C base pair at the site.
If an 8-oxoG lesion is not removed before the cell enters S-phase, adenine can be mis-incorporated opposite 8-oxoG during DNA replication [@PMID:28963982].
If this occurs, *Mutyh* can excise the mispaired adenine, leaving a one-nucleotide gap that is processed and filled with a cytosine by other BER proteins.
The resulting C:8-oxoG base pair can then be "returned" to *Ogg1* for excision and repair.
Defects in the BER response to oxidative damage lead to significantly elevated rates of C>A mutation.
For example, triple-knockout (KO) mice lacking *Ogg1*, *Mutyh*, and *Mth1* (which encodes an enzyme that prevents 8-oxo-dGTP from being incorporated during DNA synthesis [@PMID:8226881]) accumulate a 100-fold excess of 8-oxoG in their gonadal cells [@PMID:24732879].
Almost 99% of *de novo* germline mutations in the *Ogg1/Mutyh/Mth1* triple KO mice are C>A transversions, demonstrating the clear role of 8-oxoG repair in preventing C>A mutation.
Additionally, missense mutations and loss-of-heterozygosity in *Ogg1* have been associated with increased risk of human cancer [@PMID:22829015;@PMID:9662341], and copy-number losses of either *Ogg1* or *Mutyh* are linked to elevated rates of spontaneous C>A mutation in human neuroblastoma [@doi:10.1073/pnas.2007898118]. 

#### Nonsynonymous mutations may underlie the chromosome 6 mutator phenotype

The p.Thr95Ala *Ogg1* missense variant is not predicted to be deleterious by the *in silico* tool SIFT [@PMID:12824425], and occurs at a nucleotide that is not particularly well-conserved across mammalian species (Table @tbl:nonsyn-diffs).
We also observe that the *D* allele at p.Thr95Ala is segregating at an allele frequency of approximately 26% among wild-derived *Mus musculus domesticus* animals, and is fixed in other wild populations of *Mus musculus musculus*, *Mus musculus castaneus*, and *Mus spretus* . 
Although we would expect *a priori* that *Ogg1* deficiency should lead to increased 8-oxoG accumulation and elevated C>A mutation rates, these lines of evidence suggest that p.Thr95Ala is not highly deleterious on its own, and might only exert a detectable effect on the BER gene network when *Mutyh* function is also impaired.
It is also possible that *D* alleles at *Ogg1* lead to a very subtle increase in C>A mutation rates, and we are simply underpowered to detect such a small mutation rate effect in the BXDs.

#### No indication of causal structural variation or mobile element insertions near the chromosome 6 mutator locus

Although we argue above that *Ogg1* is likely the the best candidate gene to explain the new BXD C>A mutator phenotype, we cannot conclusively determine that the p.Thr95Ala missense mutation is a causal allele. 
We previously hypothesized that *Mutyh* missense mutations on *D* haplotypes were responsible for the large-effect C>A mutator phenotype we observed in the BXDs [@PMID:35545679]. 
However, subsequent long-read assemblies of several inbred laboratory mouse strains revealed that this mutator phenotype might be caused by a ~5 kbp mobile element insertion (MEI) within the first intron of *Mutyh* [@doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100291], which is associated with significantly reduced expression of *Mutyh* in embryonic stem cells.
We queried the new high-quality assemblies for evidence of mobile elements or other large structural variants (SVs) in the region surrounding the mutator locus on chromosome 6, but found no similarly compelling evidence that either SVs or MEIs might underlie the mutator phenotype described in this study. 

#### Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) might mediate germline mutator phenotypes in the BXDs

We observed strong-effect cis-eQTLs for *Ogg1* expression across a number of tissues in the BXDs (Table @tbl:eqtl-results).
In each of these tissue types, *D* genotypes were associated with decreased expression of *Ogg1*.
As mentioned above, new evidence from long-read genome assemblies has demonstrated that an intronic mobile element insertion in *Mutyh* may be responsible for decreased *Mutyh* expression, and therefore higher C>A mutation rates, in BXDs with *D* haplotypes at the chromosome 4 mutator locus [@doi:10.1016/j.xgen.2023.100291].
Taken together, these results raise the exciting possibility that the mutator loci on both chromosome 4 and chromosome 6 lead to increased C>A mutation rates by lowering the expression of DNA repair genes in the same base-excision repair network.


### *Mbd4* may buffer the effects of *Mutyh* mutator alleles by triggering apoptosis

As mentioned in the **Results**, *Mbd4* lies just outside of the 90% bootstrap confidence interval on chromosome 6.
Due to the uncertainties associated with bootstrap confidence intervals in QTL mapping [@PMID:16783000], we have included a discussion of the evidence supporting *Mbd4* as a causal gene below.

Unlike the *Ogg1* p.Thr95Ala mutation, the p.Asp129Asn variant in *Mbd4* resides within an annotated protein domain (the *Mbd4* methyl-CpG binding domain), occurs at a nucleotide and amino acid residue that are both well-conserved, and is predicted to be deleterious by SIFT [@PMID:12824425] (Table @tbl:nonsyn-diffs). 
A missense mutation that affects the homologous amino acid in humans (p.Asp142Gly in GRCh38/hg38) is also present on a single haplotype in the Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD) [@PMID:32461654] and is predicted by SIFT and Polyphen [@PMID:20354512] to be "deleterious" and "probably_damaging" in human genomes, respectively. 

One puzzling observation is that loss-of-function mutations in *Mbd4* are not typically associated with C>A mutator phenotypes. 
Instead, *Mbd4* deficiency is usually implicated in C>T mutagenesis at CpG sites, and we did not detect an excess of C>T mutations in BXDs with *D* alleles at the chromosome 6 mutator locus (Figure @fig:spectra-comparison-all).
However, loss of function mutations in *Mbd4* have also been shown to exacerbate the effects of exogenous DNA damage agents.
For example, mouse embryonic fibroblasts that harbor homozygous *Mbd4* knockouts fail to undergo apoptosis following treatment with a number of chemotherapeutics and mutagenic compounds [@PMID:14614141]. 
Most of these exogenous mutagens cause DNA damage that is normally repaired by mismatch repair (MMR) machinery, but murine intestinal cells with biallelic *Mbd4* LOF mutations also showed a reduced apoptotic response to gamma irradiation, which is repaired independently of the MMR gene *Mlh1* [@PMID:14562041]. 
Homozygous loss of *Mbd4* function also leads to accelerated intestinal tumor formation in mice that harbor an *Apc* allele that predisposes them to intestinal neoplasia [@PMID:12130785], and mice with biallelic truncations of the *Mbd4* coding sequence exhibit modestly increased mutation rates in colon cancer cell lines, including increased C>A mutation rates in certain lines [@PMID:17285135].

Together, these lines of evidence suggest that *Mbd4* can modulate sensitivity to many types of exogenous mutagens, potentially through its role in determining whether cells harboring DNA damage should undergo apoptosis [@PMID:14614141;@PMID:14562041]. 
We speculate that in mice with deficient 8-oxoguanine repair &mdash; caused by a mutator allele in *Mutyh*, for example &mdash; reactive oxygen species (ROS) could cause accumulation of DNA damage in the germline. 
If those germ cells harbor fully functional copies of *Mbd4*, they might be able to trigger apoptosis and partially mitigate the effects of a *Mutyh* mutator allele.
However, mice with reduced activity of both *Mbd4* and *Mutyh* may have a reduced ability to initiate cell death in response to DNA damage; as a result, their germ cells may accumulate even higher levels of ROS-mediated damage, leading to substantially elevated germline C>A mutation rates. 

We anticipate that future experimental work will be able to more conclusively establish a mechanistic explanation for the epistatic interaction between mutator loci described in this paper. 

### Strengths and limitations of the aggregate mutation spectrum distance approach

Our aggregate mutation spectrum distance (AMSD) approach was able to identify a mutator allele that escaped notice using quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping. 
To more systematically compare the power of AMSD and QTL mapping, we performed simulations under a variety of possible parameter regimes. 
Overall, we found that AMSD and QTL mapping have similar power to detect mutator alleles on haplotypes that each harbor tens or hundreds of *de novo* germline mutations (Figure @fig:ihd_vs_qtl_power).
Nonetheless, only AMSD was able to discover the mutator locus on chromosome 6 in the BXDs, demonstrating that it outperforms QTL mapping in certain experimental systems.
For example, simulations demonstrate that AMSD enjoys greater power than QTL mapping when haplotypes carry variable numbers of mutations that can be leveraged for mutator mapping (Figure @fig:ihd_vs_qtl_power_variable_counts). 
Because the BXDs were generated in six breeding epochs over a period of nearly 40 years, the oldest lines have accumulated orders of magnitude more mutations than the youngest lines; these younger BXDs have much noisier mutation spectra as a result.
While approaches for QTL mapping typically weight the phenotypic measurements of each sample equally, AMSD compares the *aggregate* mutation spectra of haplotypes at every locus, a property that likely increased its power to detect mutators in the BXD dataset.

Another benefit of the AMSD approach is that it obviates the need to perform separate association tests for every possible $k$-mer mutation type, and therefore the need to adjust significance thresholds for multiple tests.
Since AMSD compares the complete mutation spectrum between haplotypes that carry either allele at a site, it would also be well-powered to detect a mutator allele that exerted a coordinated effect on multiple $k$-mer mutation types (e.g., increased the rates of both C>T and C>A mutations). 

<!-- Finally, we find that IHD outperforms QTL mapping when simulated mutators are present at allele frequencies that substantially deviate from 50% ().
This feature of inter-haplotype distance may prove especially useful when mapping mutator alleles in natural, outbreeding populations, in which the effects of negative selection will likely keep mutators at relatively low population frequencies.  -->

However, the AMSD method suffers a handful of drawbacks when compared to QTL mapping.
Popular QTL mapping methods (such as R/qtl2 [@PMID:30591514]) use linear models to test associations between genotypes and phenotypes, enabling the inclusion of additive and interactive covariates, as well as kinship matrices, in QTL scans.
Although we have developed methods to account for inter-sample relatedness in the AMSD approach (*Materials and Methods*), they are not as flexible as similar methods in QTL mapping software.
Additionally, the AMSD method assumes that mutator alleles affect a subset of $k$-mer mutation types; if a mutator allele increased the rates of all mutation types equally on haplotypes that carried it, AMSD would be unable to detect it.

### Discovering mutator alleles in other experimental systems

Our discovery of a second BXD mutator allele underscores the power of recombinant inbred lines (RILs) as a resource for dissecting the genetic architecture of germline mutation rates. 
Large populations of RILs exist for many model organisms, and we anticipate that as whole-genome sequencing becomes cheaper and cheaper, the AMSD method could be useful for future mutator allele discovery outside of the BXDs.
At the same time, RILs are a finite resource that require enormous investments of time and labor to construct. 
If germline mutator alleles are only detectable in these highly unusual experimental populations, we are unlikely to discover more than a small fraction of the mutator alleles that may exist in nature. 

Fortunately, the approach introduced in this paper is readily adaptable to datasets beyond RILs. 
Thousands of human pedigrees have been sequenced in an effort to precisely estimate the rate of human *de novo* germline mutation [@PMID:31549960;@PMID:28959963;@PMID:29700473], and as family sequencing has become a more common step in the diagnosis of many congenital disorders, these datasets are growing on a daily basis. 
Large cohorts of two- or three-generation families are an example of a regime in which AMSD could enjoy high power; by pooling sparse mutation counts across many individuals who share the same candidate mutator allele, even a subtle mutator signal could potentially rise above the noise of *de novo* germline mutation rate estimates.
We note, however, that the aggregate mutation spectrum distance approach will require modification before it can be successfully applied to cohorts of outbred, sexually-reproducing individuals.
AMSD assumes that individuals harbor one of two possible genotypes at each marker, and does not yet account for heterozygous genotypes.
As a result, our method is currently applicable only to resources like the BXD RILs, in which individuals have been inbred for sufficiently long that effectively all genotypes are homozygous.

Selection on germline mutator alleles will likely prevent large-effect mutators from reaching high allele frequencies, but a subset may be detectable by sequencing a sufficient number of human trios [@PMID:35666194]. 
Since germline mutators often seem to exert their effects on a small number of mutation types, mutation spectrum analyses may have greater power to detect the genes that underlie heritable mutation rate variation, even if each gene has only a modest effect on the overall mutation rate per generation. 
